3
Bayesian Decision Theory
We discuss probability theory as the framework for making decisions
under uncertainty.
In classiﬁcation, Bayes’ rule is used to calcu-
late the probabilities of the classes.
We generalize to discuss how
we can make rational decisions among multiple actions to minimize
expected risk. We also discuss learning association rules from data.
3.1
Introduction
Programming computers to make inference from data is a cross
between statistics and computer science, where statisticians provide the
mathematical framework of making inference from data and computer
scientists work on the eﬃcient implementation of the inference methods.
Data comes from a process that is not completely known. This lack
of knowledge is indicated by modeling the process as a random process.
Maybe the process is actually deterministic, but because we do not have
access to complete knowledge about it, we model it as random and use
probability theory to analyze it. At this point, it may be a good idea to
jump to the appendix and review basic probability theory before contin-
uing with this chapter.
Tossing a coin is a random process because we cannot predict at any
toss whether the outcome will be heads or tails—that is why we toss
coins, or buy lottery tickets, or get insurance. We can only talk about the
probability that the outcome of the next toss will be heads or tails. It may
be argued that if we have access to extra knowledge such as the exact
composition of the coin, its initial position, the force and its direction
that is applied to the coin when tossing it, where and how it is caught,
and so forth, the exact outcome of the toss can be predicted.

48
3
Bayesian Decision Theory
The extra pieces of knowledge that we do not have access to are named
the unobservable variables. In the coin tossing example, the only observ-
unobservable
variables
observable variable
able variable is the outcome of the toss. Denoting the unobservables by
z and the observable as x, in reality we have
x = f(z)
where f(·) is the deterministic function that deﬁnes the outcome from
the unobservable pieces of knowledge.
Because we cannot model the
process this way, we deﬁne the outcome X as a random variable drawn
from a probability distribution P(X = x) that speciﬁes the process.
The outcome of tossing a coin is heads or tails, and we deﬁne a random
variable that takes one of two values. Let us say X = 1 denotes that the
outcome of a toss is heads and X = 0 denotes tails. Such X are Bernoulli-
distributed where the parameter of the distribution po is the probability
that the outcome is heads:
P(X = 1) = po and P(X = 0) = 1 −P(X = 1) = 1 −po
Assume that we are asked to predict the outcome of the next toss. If
we know po, our prediction will be heads if po > 0.5 and tails otherwise.
This is because if we choose the more probable case, the probability of
error, which is 1 minus the probability of our choice, will be minimum.
If this is a fair coin with po = 0.5, we have no better means of prediction
than choosing heads all the time or tossing a fair coin ourselves!
If we do not know P(X) and want to estimate this from a given sample,
then we are in the realm of statistics. We have a sample, X, containing
sample
examples drawn from the probability distribution of the observables xt,
denoted as p(x). The aim is to build an approximator to it, ˆp(x), using
the sample X.
In the coin tossing example, the sample contains the outcomes of the
past N tosses. Then using X, we can estimate po, which is the parameter
that uniquely speciﬁes the distribution. Our estimate of po is
ˆpo = #{tosses with outcome heads}
#{tosses}
Numerically using the random variables, xt is 1 if the outcome of toss t
is heads and 0 otherwise. Given the sample {heads, heads, heads, tails,
heads, tails, tails, heads, heads}, we have X = {1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1} and
the estimate is
ˆpo =
N
t=1 xt
N
= 6
9

3.2
Classiﬁcation
49
3.2
Classiﬁcation
We discussed credit scoring in section 1.2.2, where we saw that in a bank,
according to their past transactions, some customers are low-risk in that
they paid back their loans and the bank proﬁted from them and other
customers are high-risk in that they defaulted. Analyzing this data, we
would like to learn the class “high-risk customer” so that in the future,
when there is a new application for a loan, we can check whether that
person obeys the class description or not and thus accept or reject the
application. Using our knowledge of the application, let us say that we
decide that there are two pieces of information that are observable. We
observe them because we have reason to believe that they give us an
idea about the credibility of a customer.
Let us say, for example, we
observe customer’s yearly income and savings, which we represent by
two random variables X1 and X2.
It may again be claimed that if we had access to other pieces of know-
ledge such as the state of economy in full detail and full knowledge about
the customer, his or her intention, moral codes, and so forth, whether
someone is a low-risk or high-risk customer could have been determin-
istically calculated. But these are nonobservables and with what we can
observe, the credibility of a customer is denoted by a Bernoulli random
variable C conditioned on the observables X = [X1, X2]T where C = 1
indicates a high-risk customer and C = 0 indicates a low-risk customer.
Thus if we know P(C|X1, X2), when a new application arrives with X1 = x1
and X2 = x2, we can
choose

C = 1
if P(C = 1|x1, x2) > 0.5
C = 0
otherwise
or equivalently
choose

C = 1
if P(C = 1|x1, x2) > P(C = 0|x1, x2)
C = 0
otherwise
(3.1)
The probability of error is 1 −max(P(C = 1|x1, x2), P(C = 0|x1, x2)).
This example is similar to the coin tossing example except that here, the
Bernoulli random variable C is conditioned on two other observable vari-
ables. Let us denote by x the vector of observed variables, x = [x1, x2]T.
The problem then is to be able to calculate P(C|x). Using Bayes’ rule, it
Bayes’ rule
can be written as
P(C|x) = P(C)p(x|C)
p(x)
(3.2)

50
3
Bayesian Decision Theory
P(C = 1) is called the prior probability that C takes the value 1, which
prior probability
in our example corresponds to the probability that a customer is high-
risk, regardless of the x value. It is called the prior probability because
it is the knowledge we have as to the value of C before looking at the
observables x, satisfying
P(C = 0) + P(C = 1) = 1
p(x|C) is called the class likelihood and is the conditional probability
class likelihood
that an event belonging to C has the associated observation value x. In
our case, p(x1, x2|C = 1) is the probability that a high-risk customer has
his or her X1 = x1 and X2 = x2. It is what the data tells us regarding the
class.
p(x), the evidence, is the marginal probability that an observation x is
evidence
seen, regardless of whether it is a positive or negative example.
p(x) =

C
p(x, C) = p(x|C = 1)P(C = 1) + p(x|C = 0)P(C = 0)
(3.3)
Combining the prior and what the data tells us using Bayes’ rule, we
calculate the posterior probability of the concept, P(C|x), after having
posterior
probability
seen the observation, x.
posterior = prior × likelihood
evidence
Because of normalization by the evidence, the posteriors sum up to 1:
P(C = 0|x) + P(C = 1|x) = 1
Once we have the posteriors, we decide by using equation 3.1. For now,
we assume that we know the prior and likelihoods; in later chapters, we
discuss how to estimate P(C) and p(x|C) from a given training sample.
In the general case, we have K mutually exclusive and exhaustive classes;
Ci, i = 1, . . . , K; for example, in optical digit recognition, the input is a
bitmap image and there are ten classes. We have the prior probabilities
satisfying
P(Ci) ≥0 and
K

i=1
P(Ci) = 1
(3.4)
p(x|Ci) is the probability of seeing x as the input when it is known to
belong to class Ci. The posterior probability of class Ci can be calculated
as
P(Ci|x) = p(x|Ci)P(Ci)
p(x)
=
p(x|Ci)P(Ci)
K
k=1 p(x|Ck)P(Ck)
(3.5)

3.3
Losses and Risks
51
and for minimum error, the Bayes’ classiﬁer chooses the class with the
Bayes’ classifier
highest posterior probability; that is, we
choose Ci if P(Ci|x) = max
k
P(Ck|x)
(3.6)
3.3
Losses and Risks
It may be the case that decisions are not equally good or costly. A ﬁnan-
cial institution when making a decision for a loan applicant should take
into account the potential gain and loss as well. An accepted low-risk
applicant increases proﬁt, while a rejected high-risk applicant decreases
loss. The loss for a high-risk applicant erroneously accepted may be dif-
ferent from the potential gain for an erroneously rejected low-risk appli-
cant. The situation is much more critical and far from symmetry in other
domains like medical diagnosis or earthquake prediction.
Let us deﬁne action αi as the decision to assign the input to class Ci
and λik as the loss incurred for taking action αi when the input actually
loss function
belongs to Ck. Then the expected risk for taking action αi is
expected risk
R(αi|x) =
K

k=1
λikP(Ck|x)
(3.7)
and we choose the action with minimum risk:
choose αi if R(αi|x) = min
k
R(αk|x)
(3.8)
Let us deﬁne K actions αi, i = 1, . . . , K, where αi is the action of assign-
ing x to Ci. In the special case of the 0/1 loss case where
0/1 loss
λik =

0
if i = k
1
if i̸ = k
(3.9)
all correct decisions have no loss and all errors are equally costly. The
risk of taking action αi is
R(αi|x)
=
K

k=1
λikP(Ck|x)
=

k̸=i
P(Ck|x)
=
1 −P(Ci|x)

52
3
Bayesian Decision Theory
because

k P(Ck|x) = 1.
Thus to minimize risk, we choose the most
probable case. In later chapters, for simplicity, we will always assume
this case and choose the class with the highest posterior, but note that
this is indeed a special case and rarely do applications have a symmetric,
0/1 loss. In the general case, it is a simple postprocessing to go from
posteriors to risks and to take the action to minimize the risk.
In some applications, wrong decisions—namely, misclassiﬁcations—
may have very high cost, and it is generally required that a more complex—
for example, manual—decision is made if the automatic system has low
certainty of its decision. For example, if we are using an optical digit rec-
ognizer to read postal codes on envelopes, wrongly recognizing the code
causes the envelope to be sent to a wrong destination.
In such a case, we deﬁne an additional action of reject or doubt, αK+1,
reject
with αi, i = 1, . . . , K, being the usual actions of deciding on classes Ci, i =
1, . . . , K (Duda, Hart, and Stork 2001).
A possible loss function is
λik =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
0
if i = k
λ
if i = K + 1
1
otherwise
(3.10)
where 0 < λ < 1 is the loss incurred for choosing the (K + 1)st action of
reject. Then the risk of reject is
R(αK+1|x) =
K

k=1
λP(Ck|x) = λ
(3.11)
and the risk of choosing class Ci is
R(αi|x) =

k̸=i
P(Ck|x) = 1 −P(Ci|x)
(3.12)
The optimal decision rule is to
choose Ci
if R(αi|x) < R(αk|x) for all k̸ = i and
R(αi|x) < R(αK+1|x)
reject
if R(αK+1|x) < R(αi|x), i = 1, . . . , K
(3.13)
Given the loss function of equation 3.10, this simpliﬁes to
choose Ci
if P(Ci|x) > P(Ck|x) for all k̸ = i and
P(Ci|x) > 1 −λ
reject
otherwise
(3.14)

3.4
Discriminant Functions
53
This whole approach is meaningful if 0 < λ < 1: If λ = 0, we always
reject; a reject is as good as a correct classiﬁcation. If λ ≥1, we never
reject; a reject is as costly as, or costlier than, an error.
3.4
Discriminant Functions
Classiﬁcation can also be seen as implementing a set of discriminant func-
discriminant
functions
tions, gi(x), i = 1, . . . , K, such that we
choose Ci if gi(x) = max
k
gk(x)
(3.15)
We can represent the Bayes’ classiﬁer in this way by setting
gi(x) = −R(αi|x)
and the maximum discriminant function corresponds to minimum con-
ditional risk. When we use the 0/1 loss function, we have
gi(x) = P(Ci|x)
or ignoring the common normalizing term, p(x), we can write
gi(x) = p(x|Ci)P(Ci)
This divides the feature space into K decision regions R1, . . . , RK, where
decision regions
Ri = {x|gi(x) = maxk gk(x)}.
The regions are separated by decision
boundaries, surfaces in feature space where ties occur among the largest
discriminant functions (see ﬁgure 3.1).
When there are two classes, we can deﬁne a single discriminant
g(x) = g1(x) −g2(x)
and we
choose

C1
if g(x) > 0
C2
otherwise
An example is a two-class learning problem where the positive exam-
ples can be taken as C1 and the negative examples as C2. When K = 2,
the classiﬁcation system is a dichotomizer and for K ≥3, it is a poly-
dichotomizer
polychotomizer
chotomizer.

54
3
Bayesian Decision Theory
x2
x1
C1
C3
C2
reject
Figure 3.1
Example of decision regions and decision boundaries.
3.5
Utility Theory
In equation 3.7, we deﬁned the expected risk and chose the action that
minimizes expected risk. We now generalize this to utility theory, which
utility theory
is concerned with making rational decisions when we are uncertain about
the state. Let us say that given evidence x, the probability of state Sk is
calculated as P(Sk|x). We deﬁne a utility function, Uik, which measures
utility function
how good it is to take action αi when the state is Sk. The expected utility
expected utility
is
EU(αi|x) =

k
UikP(Sk|x)
(3.16)
A rational decision maker chooses the action that maximizes the ex-
pected utility
Choose αi if EU(αi|x) = max
j
EU(αj|x)
(3.17)
In the context of classiﬁcation, decisions correspond to choosing one
of the classes, and maximizing the expected utility is equivalent to mini-
mizing expected risk. Uik are generally measured in monetary terms, and
this gives us a way to deﬁne the loss matrix λik as well. For example, in

3.6
Association Rules
55
deﬁning a reject option (equation 3.10), if we know how much money we
will gain as a result of a correct decision, how much money we will lose
on a wrong decision, and how costly it is to defer the decision to a human
expert, depending on the particular application we have, we can ﬁll in the
correct values Uik in a currency unit, instead of 0, λ, and 1, and make our
decision so as to maximize expected earnings.
Note that maximizing expected utility is just one possibility; one may
deﬁne other types of rational behavior, for example, minimizing the worst
possible loss.
In the case of reject, we are choosing between the automatic decision
made by the computer program and human decision that is costlier but
assumed to have a higher probability of being correct. Similarly one can
imagine a cascade of multiple automatic decision makers, which as we
proceed are costlier but have a higher chance of being correct; we are go-
ing to discuss such cascades in chapter 17 where we talk about combining
multiple learners.
3.6
Association Rules
An association rule is an implication of the form X →Y where X is the
association rule
antecedent and Y is the consequent of the rule. One example of associ-
ation rules is in basket analysis where we want to ﬁnd the dependency
basket analysis
between two items X and Y. The typical application is in retail where X
and Y are items sold, as we discussed in section 1.2.1.
In learning association rules, there are three measures that are fre-
quently calculated:
■Support of the association rule X →Y:
support
Support(X, Y) ≡P(X, Y) = #{customers who bought X and Y}
#{customers}
(3.18)
■Conﬁdence of the association rule X →Y:
confidence
Conﬁdence(X →Y) ≡P(Y|X)
=
P(X, Y)
P(X)
=
#{customers who bought X and Y}
#{customers who bought X}
(3.19)
■Lift, also known as interest of the association rule X →Y:
lift
interest

56
3
Bayesian Decision Theory
Lift(X →Y) =
P(X, Y)
P(X)P(Y) = P(Y|X)
P(Y)
(3.20)
There are other measures as well (Omiecinski 2003), but these three,
especially the ﬁrst two, are the most widely known and used. Conﬁdence
is the conditional probability, P(Y|X), which is what we normally calcu-
late. To be able to say that the rule holds with enough conﬁdence, this
value should be close to 1 and signiﬁcantly larger than P(Y), the overall
probability of people buying Y. We are also interested in maximizing the
support of the rule, because even if there is a dependency with a strong
conﬁdence value, if the number of such customers is small, the rule is
worthless. Support shows the statistical signiﬁcance of the rule, whereas
conﬁdence shows the strength of the rule. The minimum support and
conﬁdence values are set by the company, and all rules with higher sup-
port and conﬁdence are searched for in the database.
If X and Y are independent, then we expect lift to be close to 1; if the
ratio diﬀers—if P(Y|X) and P(Y) are diﬀerent—we expect there to be a
dependency between the two items: If the lift is more than 1, we can say
that X makes Y more likely, and if the lift is less than 1, having X makes
Y less likely.
These formulas can easily be generalized to more than two items. For
example, {X, Y, Z} is a three-item set, and we may look for a rule, such
as X, Z →Y, that is, P(Y|X, Z). We are interested in ﬁnding all such rules
having high enough support and conﬁdence and because a sales database
is generally very large, we want to ﬁnd them by doing a small number of
passes over the database. There is an eﬃcient algorithm, called Apri-
Apriori algorithm
ori (Agrawal et al. 1996) that does this, which has two steps: (1) ﬁnding
frequent itemsets, that is, those which have enough support, and (2) con-
verting them to rules with enough conﬁdence, by splitting the items into
two, as items in the antecedent and items in the consequent:
1. To ﬁnd frequent itemsets quickly (without complete enumeration of all
subsets of items), the Apriori algorithm uses the fact that for {X, Y, Z}
to be frequent (have enough support), all its subsets {X, Y}, {X, Z},
and {Y, Z} should be frequent as well—adding another item can never
increase support. That is, we only need to check for three-item sets all
of whose two-item subsets are frequent; or, in other words, if a two-
item set is known not to be frequent, all its supersets can be pruned
and need not be checked.

3.6
Association Rules
57
We start by ﬁnding the frequent one-item sets and at each step, induc-
tively, from frequent k-item sets, we generate candidate k+1-item sets
and then do a pass over the data to check if they have enough support.
The Apriori algorithm stores the frequent itemsets in a hash table for
easy access. Note that the number of candidate itemsets will decrease
very rapidly as k increases. If the largest itemset has n items, we need
a total of n + 1 passes over the data.
2. Once we ﬁnd the frequent k-item sets, we need to convert them to
rules by splitting the k items into two as antecedent and consequent.
Just like we do for generating the itemsets, we start by putting a single
consequent and k −1 items in the antecedent. Then, for all possible
single consequents, we check if the rule has enough conﬁdence and
remove it if it does not.
Note that for the same itemset, there may be multiple rules with dif-
ferent subsets as antecedent and consequent. Then, inductively, we
check whether we can move another item from the antecedent to the
consequent. Rules with more items in the consequent are more spe-
ciﬁc and more useful. Here, as in itemset generation, we use the fact
that to be able to have rules with two items in the consequent with
enough conﬁdence, each of the two rules with single consequent by
itself should have enough conﬁdence; that is, we go from one conse-
quent rules to two consequent rules and need not check for all possible
two-term consequents (exercise 7).
It should be kept in mind that a rule X →Y need not imply causality
but just an association. In a problem, there may also be hidden variables
hidden variables
whose values are never known through evidence. The advantage of us-
ing hidden variables is that the dependency structure can be more easily
deﬁned. For example, in basket analysis when we want to ﬁnd the depen-
dencies among items sold, let us say we know that there is a dependency
among “baby food,” “diapers,” and “milk” in that a customer buying one
of these is very much likely to buy the other two. Instead of representing
dependencies among these three, we may designate a hidden node, “baby
at home,” as the hidden cause of the consumption of these three items.
Graphical models that we will discuss in chapter 16 allow us to represent
such hidden variables. When there are hidden nodes, their values are
estimated given the values of observed nodes and ﬁlled in.

58
3
Bayesian Decision Theory
3.7
Notes
Making decisions under uncertainty has a long history, and over time hu-
manity has looked at all sorts of strange places for evidence to remove the
uncertainty: stars, crystal balls, and coﬀee cups. Reasoning from mean-
ingful evidence using probability theory is only a few hundred years old;
see Newman 1988 for the history of probability and statistics and some
very early articles by Laplace, Bernoulli, and others who have founded the
theory.
Russell and Norvig (1995) give an excellent discussion of utility theory
and the value of information, also discussing the assignment of utilities
in monetary terms. Shafer and Pearl 1990 is an early collection of articles
on reasoning under uncertainty.
Association rules are successfully used in many data mining applica-
tions, and we see such rules on many Web sites that recommend books,
movies, music, and so on.
The algorithm is very simple and its eﬃ-
cient implementation on very large databases is critical (Zhang and Zhang
2002; Li 2006). Later, we will see in chapter 16 about graphical models
how to generalize from association rules to concepts that need not be
binary and where associations can be of diﬀerent types, also allowing
hidden variables.
3.8
Exercises
1. In a two-class problem, the likelihood ratio is
likelihood ratio
p(x|C1)
p(x|C2)
Write the discriminant function in terms of the likelihood ratio.
2. In a two-class problem, the log odds is deﬁned as
log odds
log P(C1|x)
P(C2|x)
Write the discriminant function in terms of the log odds.
3. In a two-class, two-action problem, if the loss function is λ11 = λ22 = 0,
λ12 = 10, and λ21 = 1, write the optimal decision rule.
4. Propose a three-level cascade where when one level rejects, the next one is
used as in equation 3.10. How can we ﬁx the λ on diﬀerent levels?
5. Somebody tosses a fair coin and if the result is heads, you get nothing; oth-
erwise you get $5. How much would you pay to play this game? What if the
win is $500 instead of $5?

3.9
References
59
6. Generalize the conﬁdence and support formulas for basket analysis to calcu-
late k-dependencies, namely, P(Y|X1, . . ., Xk).
7. Show that as we move an item from the consequent to the antecedent, conﬁ-
dence can never increase: conﬁdence(ABC →D) ≥conﬁdence(AB →CD).
8. Associated with each item sold in basket analysis, if we also have a number
indicating how much the customer enjoyed the product, for example, in a
scale of 0 to 10, how can you use this extra information to calculate which
item to propose to a customer?
9. Show example transaction data where for the rule X →Y:
(a) Both support and conﬁdence are high.
(b) Support is high and conﬁdence is low.
(c) Support is low and conﬁdence is high.
(d) Both support and conﬁdence are low.
3.9
References
Agrawal, R., H. Mannila, R. Srikant, H. Toivonen, and A. Verkamo. 1996. “Fast
Discovery of Association Rules.”
In Advances in Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, ed. U. M. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, P. Smyth, and R. Uthu-
rusamy, 307–328. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Duda, R. O., P. E. Hart, and D. G. Stork. 2001. Pattern Classiﬁcation, 2nd ed.
New York: Wiley.
Li, J. 2006. “On Optimal Rule Discovery.” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Discovery 18: 460–471.
Newman, J. R., ed. 1988. The World of Mathematics. Redmond, WA: Tempus.
Omiecinski, E. R. 2003. “Alternative Interest Measures for Mining Associations
in Databases.” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Discovery 15: 57–69.
Russell, S., and P. Norvig. 1995. Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. New
York: Prentice Hall.
Shafer, G., and J. Pearl, eds. 1990. Readings in Uncertain Reasoning. San Mateo,
CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Zhang, C., and S. Zhang. 2002. Association Rule Mining: Models and Algorithms.
New York: Springer.

