9
Decision Trees
A decision tree is a hierarchical data structure implementing the
divide-and-conquer strategy. It is an eﬃcient nonparametric method,
which can be used for both classiﬁcation and regression. We discuss
learning algorithms that build the tree from a given labeled training
sample, as well as how the tree can be converted to a set of simple
rules that are easy to understand. Another possibility is to learn a
rule base directly.
9.1
Introduction
In parametric estimation, we deﬁne a model over the whole input
space and learn its parameters from all of the training data. Then we
use the same model and the same parameter set for any test input. In
nonparametric estimation, we divide the input space into local regions,
deﬁned by a distance measure like the Euclidean norm, and for each in-
put, the corresponding local model computed from the training data in
that region is used. In the instance-based models we discussed in chap-
ter 8, given an input, identifying the local data deﬁning the local model
is costly; it requires calculating the distances from the given input to all
of the training instances, which is O(N).
A decision tree is a hierarchical model for supervised learning whereby
decision tree
the local region is identiﬁed in a sequence of recursive splits in a smaller
number of steps. A decision tree is composed of internal decision nodes
and terminal leaves (see ﬁgure 9.1). Each decision node m implements a
decision node
test function fm(x) with discrete outcomes labeling the branches. Given
an input, at each node, a test is applied and one of the branches is taken
depending on the outcome. This process starts at the root and is repeated

186
9
Decision Trees
x2
x1
w10
w20
x1>w10
x2>w20
Yes
No
No
Yes
C1
C1
C1
C2
C2
Figure 9.1
Example of a dataset and the corresponding decision tree.
Oval
nodes are the decision nodes and rectangles are leaf nodes. The univariate de-
cision node splits along one axis, and successive splits are orthogonal to each
other. After the ﬁrst split, {x|x1 < w10} is pure and is not split further.
recursively until a leaf node is hit, at which point the value written in the
leaf node
leaf constitutes the output.
A decision tree is also a nonparametric model in the sense that we
do not assume any parametric form for the class densities and the tree
structure is not ﬁxed a priori but the tree grows, branches and leaves
are added, during learning depending on the complexity of the problem
inherent in the data.
Each fm(x) deﬁnes a discriminant in the d-dimensional input space
dividing it into smaller regions that are further subdivided as we take a
path from the root down. fm(·) is a simple function and when written
down as a tree, a complex function is broken down into a series of simple
decisions. Diﬀerent decision tree methods assume diﬀerent models for
fm(·), and the model class deﬁnes the shape of the discriminant and
the shape of regions. Each leaf node has an output label, which in the
case of classiﬁcation is the class code and in regression is a numeric
value. A leaf node deﬁnes a localized region in the input space where
instances falling in this region have the same labels (in classiﬁcation),

9.2
Univariate Trees
187
or very similar numeric outputs (in regression). The boundaries of the
regions are deﬁned by the discriminants that are coded in the internal
nodes on the path from the root to the leaf node.
The hierarchical placement of decisions allows a fast localization of the
region covering an input. For example, if the decisions are binary, then
in the best case, each decision eliminates half of the cases. If there are b
regions, then in the best case, the correct region can be found in log2 b
decisions. Another advantage of the decision tree is interpretability. As
we will see shortly, the tree can be converted to a set of IF-THEN rules that
are easily understandable. For this reason, decision trees are very pop-
ular and sometimes preferred over more accurate but less interpretable
methods.
We start with univariate trees where the test in a decision node uses
only one input variable and we see how such trees can be constructed
for classiﬁcation and regression. We later generalize this to multivariate
trees where all inputs can be used in an internal node.
9.2
Univariate Trees
In a univariate tree, in each internal node, the test uses only one of the
univariate tree
input dimensions. If the used input dimension, xj, is discrete, taking one
of n possible values, the decision node checks the value of xj and takes
the corresponding branch, implementing an n-way split. For example, if
an attribute is color ∈{red, blue, green}, then a node on that attribute
has three branches, each one corresponding to one of the three possible
values of the attribute.
A decision node has discrete branches and a numeric input should be
discretized. If xj is numeric (ordered), the test is a comparison
fm(x) : xj > wm0
(9.1)
where wm0 is a suitably chosen threshold value. The decision node di-
vides the input space into two: Lm = {x|xj > wm0} and Rm = {x|xj ≤
wm0}; this is called a binary split. Successive decision nodes on a path
binary split
from the root to a leaf further divide these into two using other attributes
and generating splits orthogonal to each other. The leaf nodes deﬁne hy-
perrectangles in the input space (see ﬁgure 9.1).
Tree induction is the construction of the tree given a training sample.
For a given training set, there exists many trees that code it with no er-
ror, and, for simplicity, we are interested in ﬁnding the smallest among

188
9
Decision Trees
them, where tree size is measured as the number of nodes in the tree
and the complexity of the decision nodes. Finding the smallest tree is
NP-complete (Quinlan 1986), and we are forced to use local search proce-
dures based on heuristics that give reasonable trees in reasonable time.
Tree learning algorithms are greedy and, at each step, starting at the
root with the complete training data, we look for the best split.
This
splits the training data into two or n, depending on whether the chosen
attribute is numeric or discrete. We then continue splitting recursively
with the corresponding subset until we do not need to split anymore, at
which point a leaf node is created and labeled.
9.2.1
Classiﬁcation Trees
In the case of a decision tree for classiﬁcation, namely, a classiﬁcation
classification tree
tree, the goodness of a split is quantiﬁed by an impurity measure.
A
impurity measure
split is pure if after the split, for all branches, all the instances choosing
a branch belong to the same class.
Let us say for node m, Nm is the
number of training instances reaching node m. For the root node, it is N.
Ni
m of Nm belong to class Ci, with 
i Ni
m = Nm. Given that an instance
reaches node m, the estimate for the probability of class Ci is
ˆP(Ci|x, m) ≡pi
m = Ni
m
Nm
(9.2)
Node m is pure if pi
m for all i are either 0 or 1. It is 0 when none of the
instances reaching node m are of class Ci, and it is 1 if all such instances
are of Ci. If the split is pure, we do not need to split any further and can
add a leaf node labeled with the class for which pi
m is 1. One possible
function to measure impurity is entropy (Quinlan 1986) (see ﬁgure 9.2)
entropy
Im = −
K

i=1
pi
m log2 pi
m
(9.3)
where 0 log 0 ≡0. Entropy in information theory speciﬁes the minimum
number of bits needed to encode the class code of an instance. In a two-
class problem, if p1 = 1 and p2 = 0, all examples are of C1, and we do
not need to send anything, and the entropy is 0. If p1 = p2 = 0.5, we
need to send a bit to signal one of the two cases, and the entropy is 1.
In between these two extremes, we can devise codes and use less than
a bit per message by having shorter codes for the more likely class and

9.2
Univariate Trees
189
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
p
entropy=−p*log2(p)−(1−p)*log2(1−p)
Figure 9.2
Entropy function for a two-class problem.
longer codes for the less likely. When there are K > 2 classes, the same
discussion holds and the largest entropy is log2 K when pi = 1/K.
But entropy is not the only possible measure. For a two-class problem
where p1 ≡p and p2 = 1 −p, φ(p, 1 −p) is a nonnegative function
measuring the impurity of a split if it satisﬁes the following properties
(Devroye, Györﬁ, and Lugosi 1996):
■φ(1/2, 1/2) ≥φ(p, 1 −p), for any p ∈[0, 1].
■φ(0, 1) = φ(1, 0) = 0.
■φ(p, 1−p) is increasing in p on [0, 1/2] and decreasing in p on [1/2, 1].
Examples are
1. Entropy
φ(p, 1 −p) = −p log2 p −(1 −p) log2(1 −p)
(9.4)
Equation 9.3 is the generalization to K > 2 classes.
2. Gini index (Breiman et al. 1984)
Gini index
φ(p, 1 −p) = 2p(1 −p)
(9.5)

190
9
Decision Trees
3. Misclassiﬁcation error
φ(p, 1 −p) = 1 −max(p, 1 −p)
(9.6)
These can be generalized to K > 2 classes, and the misclassiﬁcation er-
ror can be generalized to minimum risk given a loss function (exercise 1).
Research has shown that there is not a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between
these three measures.
If node m is not pure, then the instances should be split to decrease
impurity, and there are multiple possible attributes on which we can split.
For a numeric attribute, multiple split positions are possible. Among all,
we look for the split that minimizes impurity after the split because we
want to generate the smallest tree. If the subsets after the split are closer
to pure, fewer splits (if any) will be needed afterward. Of course this is
locally optimal, and we have no guarantee of ﬁnding the smallest decision
tree.
Let us say at node m, Nmj of Nm take branch j; these are xt for which
the test fm(xt) returns outcome j. For a discrete attribute with n values,
there are n outcomes, and for a numeric attribute, there are two outcomes
(n = 2), in either case satisfying
n
j=1 Nmj = Nm. Ni
mj of Nmj belong to
class Ci:
K
i=1 Ni
mj = Nmj. Similarly,
n
j=1 Ni
mj = Ni
m.
Then given that at node m, the test returns outcome j, the estimate for
the probability of class Ci is
ˆP(Ci|x, m, j) ≡pi
mj =
Ni
mj
Nmj
(9.7)
and the total impurity after the split is given as
I′
m = −
n

j=1
Nmj
Nm
K

i=1
pi
mj log2 pi
mj
(9.8)
In the case of a numeric attribute, to be able to calculate pi
mj using
equation 9.1, we also need to know wm0 for that node. There are Nm −1
possible wm0 between Nm data points: we do not need to test for all
(possibly inﬁnite) points; it is enough to test, for example, at halfway
between points. Note also that the best split is always between adjacent
points belonging to diﬀerent classes. So we try them, and the best in
terms of purity is taken for the purity of the attribute. In the case of a
discrete attribute, no such iteration is necessary.

9.2
Univariate Trees
191
GenerateTree(X)
If NodeEntropy(X)< θI /* equation 9.3 */
Create leaf labelled by majority class in X
Return
i ←SplitAttribute(X)
For each branch of xi
Find Xi falling in branch
GenerateTree(Xi)
SplitAttribute(X)
MinEnt←MAX
For all attributes i = 1, . . . , d
If xi is discrete with n values
Split X into X1, . . . , Xn by xi
e ←SplitEntropy(X1, . . . , Xn) /* equation 9.8 */
If e<MinEnt MinEnt ←e; bestf ←i
Else /* xi is numeric */
For all possible splits
Split X into X1, X2 on xi
e←SplitEntropy(X1, X2)
If e<MinEnt MinEnt ←e; bestf ←i
Return bestf
Figure 9.3
Classiﬁcation tree construction.
So for all attributes, discrete and numeric, and for a numeric attribute
for all split positions, we calculate the impurity and choose the one that
has the minimum entropy, for example, as measured by equation 9.8.
Then tree construction continues recursively and in parallel for all the
branches that are not pure, until all are pure. This is the basis of the Clas-
Classification and
Regression Trees
siﬁcation and Regression Trees (CART) algorithm (Breiman et al. 1984),
ID3 algorithm (Quinlan 1986), and its extension C4.5 (Quinlan 1993). The
ID3
C4.5
pseudocode of the algorithm is given in ﬁgure 9.3.
It can also be said that at each step during tree construction, we choose
the split that causes the largest decrease in impurity, which is the diﬀer-
ence between the impurity of data reaching node m (equation 9.3) and the
total entropy of data reaching its branches after the split (equation 9.8).

192
9
Decision Trees
One problem is that such splitting favors attributes with many values.
When there are many values, there are many branches, and the impurity
can be much less. For example, if we take training index t as an attribute,
the impurity measure will choose that because then the impurity of each
branch is 0, although it is not a reasonable feature. Nodes with many
branches are complex and go against our idea of splitting class discrim-
inants into simple decisions. Methods have been proposed to penalize
such attributes and to balance the impurity drop and the branching fac-
tor.
When there is noise, growing the tree until it is purest, we may grow
a very large tree and it overﬁts; for example, consider the case of a mis-
labeled instance amid a group of correctly labeled instances.
To alle-
viate such overﬁtting, tree construction ends when nodes become pure
enough, namely, a subset of data is not split further if I < θI. This im-
plies that we do not require that pi
mj be exactly 0 or 1 but close enough,
with a threshold θp. In such a case, a leaf node is created and is labeled
with the class having the highest pi
mj.
θI (or θp) is the complexity parameter, like h or k of nonparametric
estimation. When they are small, the variance is high and the tree grows
large to reﬂect the training set accurately, and when they are large, vari-
ance is lower and a smaller tree roughly represents the training set and
may have large bias. The ideal value depends on the cost of misclassiﬁ-
cation, as well as the costs of memory and computation.
It is generally advised that in a leaf, one stores the posterior proba-
bilities of classes, instead of labeling the leaf with the class having the
highest posterior.
These probabilities may be required in later steps,
for example, in calculating risks. Note that we do not need to store the
instances reaching the node or the exact counts; just ratios suﬃce.
9.2.2
Regression Trees
A regression tree is constructed in almost the same manner as a clas-
regression tree
siﬁcation tree, except that the impurity measure that is appropriate for
classiﬁcation is replaced by a measure appropriate for regression. Let us
say for node m, Xm is the subset of X reaching node m; namely, it is the
set of all x ∈X satisfying all the conditions in the decision nodes on the
path from the root until node m. We deﬁne
bm(x) =

1
if x ∈Xm: x reaches node m
0
otherwise
(9.9)

9.2
Univariate Trees
193
In regression, the goodness of a split is measured by the mean square
error from the estimated value. Let us say gm is the estimated value in
node m.
Em =
1
Nm

t
(rt −gm)2bm(xt)
(9.10)
where Nm = |Xm| = 
t bm(xt).
In a node, we use the mean (median if there is too much noise) of the
required outputs of instances reaching the node
gm =

t bm(xt)rt

t bm(xt)
(9.11)
Then equation 9.10 corresponds to the variance at m. If at a node, the
error is acceptable, that is, Em < θr, then a leaf node is created and it
stores the gm value. Just like the regressogram of chapter 8, this creates
a piecewise constant approximation with discontinuities at leaf bound-
aries.
If the error is not acceptable, data reaching node m is split further
such that the sum of the errors in the branches is minimum. As in clas-
siﬁcation, at each node, we look for the attribute (and split threshold
for a numeric attribute) that minimizes the error, and then we continue
recursively.
Let us deﬁne Xmj as the subset of Xm taking branch j: ∪n
j=1Xmj = Xm.
We deﬁne
bmj(x) =

1
if x ∈Xmj: x reaches node m and takes branch j
0
otherwise
(9.12)
gmj is the estimated value in branch j of node m.
gmj =

t bmj(xt)rt

t bmj(xt)
(9.13)
and the error after the split is
E′
m =
1
Nm

j

t
(rt −gmj)2bmj(xt)
(9.14)
The drop in error for any split is given as the diﬀerence between equa-
tion 9.10 and equation 9.14. We look for the split such that this drop is
maximum or, equivalently, where equation 9.14 takes its minimum. The
code given in ﬁgure 9.3 can be adapted to training a regression tree by

194
9
Decision Trees
replacing entropy calculations with mean square error and class labels
with averages.
Mean square error is one possible error function; another is worst pos-
sible error
Em = max
j
max
t
|rt −gmj|bm(xt)
(9.15)
and using this, we can guarantee that the error for any instance is never
larger than a given threshold.
The acceptable error threshold is the complexity parameter; when it is
small, we generate large trees and risk overﬁtting; when it is large, we
underﬁt and smooth too much (see ﬁgures 9.4 and 9.5).
Similar to going from running mean to running line in nonparametric
regression, instead of taking an average at a leaf that implements a con-
stant ﬁt, we can also do a linear regression ﬁt over the instances choosing
the leaf:
gm(x) = wT
mx + wm0
(9.16)
This makes the estimate in a leaf dependent on x and generates smaller
trees, but there is the expense of extra computation at a leaf node.
9.3
Pruning
Frequently, a node is not split further if the number of training instances
reaching a node is smaller than a certain percentage of the training set—
for example, 5 percent—regardless of the impurity or error. The idea is
that any decision based on too few instances causes variance and thus
generalization error. Stopping tree construction early on before it is full
is called prepruning the tree.
prepruning
Another possibility to get simpler trees is postpruning, which in prac-
postpruning
tice works better than prepruning. We saw before that tree growing is
greedy and at each step, we make a decision, namely, generate a decision
node, and continue further on, never backtracking and trying out an al-
ternative. The only exception is postpruning where we try to ﬁnd and
prune unnecessary subtrees.
In postpruning, we grow the tree full until all leaves are pure and we
have no training error. We then ﬁnd subtrees that cause overﬁtting and
we prune them. From the initial labeled set, we set aside a pruning set,
pruning set
unused during training. For each subtree, we replace it with a leaf node

9.3
Pruning
195
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
−2
0
2
4
θr = 0.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
−2
0
2
4
θr = 0.2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
−2
0
2
4
θr = 0.05
Figure 9.4
Regression tree smooths for various values of θr. The corresponding
trees are given in ﬁgure 9.5.
labeled with the training instances covered by the subtree (appropriately
for classiﬁcation or regression). If the leaf node does not perform worse
than the subtree on the pruning set, we prune the subtree and keep the
leaf node because the additional complexity of the subtree is not justiﬁed;
otherwise, we keep the subtree.
For example, in the third tree of ﬁgure 9.5, there is a subtree starting
with condition x < 6.31. This subtree can be replaced by a leaf node of
y = 0.9 (as in the second tree) if the error on the pruning set does not
increase during the substitution. Note that the pruning set should not be
confused with (and is distinct from) the validation set.
Comparing prepruning and postpruning, we can say that prepruning is
faster but postpruning generally leads to more accurate trees.

196
9
Decision Trees
x < 3.16
x < 1.36
Yes 
No 
No
Yes
1.37
-1.35
1.86
x < 3.16
x < 1.36
Yes 
No 
2.20
x < 5 .96 
No
Yes
1.37 
-1.35 
No
Yes
0.9 
2.40 
Yes 
No 
x < 6.91
x < 3.16
x < 1.36
Yes 
No 
2.20
x < 5 .96 
No
Yes
-1.35
No
Yes
2.40
Yes 
No 
x < 6.91
x < 0.7 6 
No
Yes
1.15 
1.80 
No
Yes
1.20 
0.60 
x < 6.31
Figure 9.5
Regression trees implementing the smooths of ﬁgure 9.4 for various
values of θr.

9.4
Rule Extraction from Trees
197
x1 > 38.5
x2 > 2.5
Yes 
No 
No
Yes
0.8 
0.6 
x4
'A' 
'C' 
'B'
0.2
0.3
0.4
x1 : Age
x2 : Years in job
x3 : Gender
x4 : Job type
Figure 9.6
Example of a (hypothetical) decision tree. Each path from the root to
a leaf can be written down as a conjunctive rule, composed of conditions deﬁned
by the decision nodes on the path.
9.4
Rule Extraction from Trees
A decision tree does its own feature extraction. The univariate tree only
uses the necessary variables, and after the tree is built, certain features
may not be used at all. We can also say that features closer to the root
are more important globally. For example, the decision tree given in ﬁg-
ure 9.6 uses x1, x2, and x4, but not x3. It is possible to use a decision tree
for feature extraction: we build a tree and then take only those features
used by the tree as inputs to another learning method.
Another main advantage of decision trees is interpretability: The de-
interpretability
cision nodes carry conditions that are simple to understand. Each path
from the root to a leaf corresponds to one conjunction of tests, as all
those conditions should be satisﬁed to reach to the leaf. These paths to-
gether can be written down as a set of IF-THEN rules, called a rule base.
IF-THEN rules
One such method is C4.5Rules (Quinlan 1993).
For example, the decision tree of ﬁgure 9.6 can be written down as the
following set of rules:
R1:
IF (age>38.5) AND (years-in-job>2.5) THEN y =0.8
R2:
IF (age>38.5) AND (years-in-job≤2.5) THEN y =0.6
R3:
IF (age≤38.5) AND (job-type=‘A’) THEN y =0.4
R4:
IF (age≤38.5) AND (job-type=‘B’) THEN y =0.3
R5:
IF (age≤38.5) AND (job-type=‘C’) THEN y =0.2

198
9
Decision Trees
Such a rule base allows knowledge extraction; it can be easily under-
knowledge
extraction
stood and allows experts to verify the model learned from data. For each
rule, one can also calculate the percentage of training data covered by the
rule, namely, rule support. The rules reﬂect the main characteristics of
rule support
the dataset: they show the important features and split positions. For in-
stance, in this (hypothetical) example, we see that in terms of our purpose
(y), people who are thirty-eight years old or less are diﬀerent from people
who are thirty-nine or more years old. And among this latter group, it is
the job type that makes them diﬀerent, whereas in the former group, it is
the number of years in a job that is the best discriminating characteristic.
In the case of a classiﬁcation tree, there may be more than one leaf
labeled with the same class. In such a case, these multiple conjunctive
expressions corresponding to diﬀerent paths can be combined as a dis-
junction (OR). The class region then corresponds to a union of these mul-
tiple patches, each patch corresponding to the region deﬁned by one leaf.
For example, class C1 of ﬁgure 9.1 is written as
IF (x ≤w10) OR ((x1 > w10) AND (x2 ≤w20)) THEN C1
Pruning rules is possible for simpliﬁcation. Pruning a subtree corre-
pruning rules
sponds to pruning terms from a number of rules at the same time. It
may be possible to prune a term from one rule without touching other
rules. For example, in the previous rule set, for R3, if we see that all
whose job-type=‘A’ have outcomes close to 0.4, regardless of age, R3
can be pruned as
R3′ : IF (job-type=‘A’) THEN y =0.4
Note that after the rules are pruned, it may not be possible to write
them back as a tree anymore.
9.5
Learning Rules from Data
As we have just seen, one way to get IF-THEN rules is to train a decision
tree and convert it to rules. Another is to learn the rules directly. Rule
rule induction
induction works similar to tree induction except that rule induction does
a depth-ﬁrst search and generates one path (rule) at a time, whereas tree
induction goes breadth-ﬁrst and generates all paths simultaneously.
Rules are learned one at a time. Each rule is a conjunction of condi-
tions on discrete or numeric attributes (as in decision trees) and these

9.5
Learning Rules from Data
199
conditions are added one at a time, to optimize some criterion, for exam-
ple, minimize entropy. A rule is said to cover an example if the example
satisﬁes all the conditions of the rule. Once a rule is grown and pruned,
it is added to the rule base and all the training examples covered by the
rule are removed from the training set, and the process continues until
enough rules are added. This is called sequential covering. There is an
sequential
covering
outer loop of adding one rule at a time to the rule base and an inner loop
of adding one condition at a time to the current rule. These steps are
both greedy and do not guarantee optimality. Both loops have a pruning
step for better generalization.
One example of a rule induction algorithm is Ripper (Cohen 1995),
Ripper
based on an earlier algorithm Irep (Fürnkranz and Widmer 1994).
We
Irep
start with the case of two classes where we talk of positive and negative
examples, then later generalize to K > 2 classes. Rules are added to ex-
plain positive examples such that if an instance is not covered by any
rule, then it is classiﬁed as negative. So a rule when it matches is either
correct (true positive), or it causes a false positive. The pseudocode of
the outer loop of Ripper is given in ﬁgure 9.7.
In Ripper, conditions are added to the rule to maximize an information
gain measure used in Quinlan’s (1990) Foil algorithm. Let us say we have
Foil
rule R and R′ is the candidate rule after adding a condition. Change in
gain is deﬁned as
Gain(R′, R) = s ·

log2
N′
+
N′ −log2
N+
N

(9.17)
where N is the number of instances that are covered by R and N+ is the
number of true positives in them. N′ and N′
+ are similarly deﬁned for R′.
s is the number of true positives in R, which are still true positives in R′,
after adding the condition. In terms of information theory, the change in
gain measures the reduction in bits to encode a positive instance.
Conditions are added to a rule until it covers no negative example.
Once a rule is grown, it is pruned back by deleting conditions in reverse
order, to ﬁnd the rule that maximizes the rule value metric
rule value metric
rvm(R) = p −n
p + n
(9.18)
where p and n are the number of true and false positives, respectively,
on the pruning set, which is one-third of the data, having used two-thirds
as the growing set.

200
9
Decision Trees
Ripper(Pos,Neg,k)
RuleSet ←LearnRuleSet(Pos,Neg)
For k times
RuleSet ←OptimizeRuleSet(RuleSet,Pos,Neg)
LearnRuleSet(Pos,Neg)
RuleSet ←∅
DL ←DescLen(RuleSet,Pos,Neg)
Repeat
Rule ←LearnRule(Pos,Neg)
Add Rule to RuleSet
DL’ ←DescLen(RuleSet,Pos,Neg)
If DL’>DL+64
PruneRuleSet(RuleSet,Pos,Neg)
Return RuleSet
If DL’<DL DL ←DL’
Delete instances covered by Rule from Pos and Neg
Until Pos = ∅
Return RuleSet
PruneRuleSet(RuleSet,Pos,Neg)
For each Rule ∈RuleSet in reverse order
DL ←DescLen(RuleSet,Pos,Neg)
DL’ ←DescLen(RuleSet-Rule,Pos,Neg)
IF DL’<DL Delete Rule from RuleSet
Return RuleSet
OptimizeRuleSet(RuleSet,Pos,Neg)
For each Rule ∈RuleSet
DL0 ←DescLen(RuleSet,Pos,Neg)
DL1 ←DescLen(RuleSet-Rule+
ReplaceRule(RuleSet,Pos,Neg),Pos,Neg)
DL2 ←DescLen(RuleSet-Rule+
ReviseRule(RuleSet,Rule,Pos,Neg),Pos,Neg)
If DL1=min(DL0,DL1,DL2)
Delete Rule from RuleSet and
add ReplaceRule(RuleSet,Pos,Neg)
Else If DL2=min(DL0,DL1,DL2)
Delete Rule from RuleSet and
add ReviseRule(RuleSet,Rule,Pos,Neg)
Return RuleSet
Figure 9.7
Ripper algorithm for learning rules. Only the outer loop is given; the
inner loop is similar to adding nodes in a decision tree.

9.5
Learning Rules from Data
201
Once a rule is grown and pruned, all positive and negative training ex-
amples covered by the rule are removed from the training set. If there
are remaining positive examples, rule induction continues. In the case of
noise, we may stop early, namely, when a rule does not explain enough
number of examples. To measure the worth of a rule, minimum descrip-
tion length (section 4.8) is used (Quinlan 1995). Typically, we stop if the
description of the rule is not shorter than the description of instances
it explains. The description length of a rule base is the sum of the de-
scription lengths of all the rules in the rule base, plus the description of
instances not covered by the rule base. Ripper stops adding rules when
the description length of the rule base is more than 64 bits larger than
the best description length so far. Once the rule base is learned, we pass
over the rules in reverse order to see if they can be removed without
increasing the description length.
Rules in the rule base are also optimized after they are learned. Ripper
considers two alternatives to a rule: One, called the replacement rule,
starts from an empty rule, is grown, and is then pruned. The second,
called the revision rule, starts with the rule as it is, is grown, and is then
pruned. These two are compared with the original rule, and the shortest
of three is added to the rule base. This optimization of the rule base can
be done k times, typically twice.
When there are K > 2 classes, they are ordered in terms of their prior
probabilities such that C1 has the lowest prior probability and CK has the
highest. Then a sequence of two-class problems are deﬁned such that,
ﬁrst, instances belonging to C1 are taken as positive examples and in-
stances of all other classes are taken as negative examples. Then, having
learned C1 and all its instances removed, it learns to separate C2 from
C3, . . . , CK. This process is repeated until only CK remains. The empty
default rule is then labeled CK, so that if an instance is not covered by
any rule, it will be assigned to CK.
For a training set of size N, Ripper’s complexity is O(N log2 N) and
is an algorithm that can be used on very large training sets (Dietterich
1997). The rules we learn are propositional rules. More expressive, ﬁrst-
propositional rules
first-order rules
order rules have variables in conditions, called predicates. A predicate is
a function that returns true or false depending on the value of its argu-
ment. Predicates therefore allow deﬁning relations between the values of
attributes, which cannot be done by propositions (Mitchell 1997):
IF Father(y, x) AND Female(y) THEN Daughter(x, y)

202
9
Decision Trees
Such rules can be seen as programs in a logic programming language,
such as Prolog, and learning them from data is called inductive logic pro-
inductive logic
programming
gramming. One such algorithm is Foil (Quinlan 1990).
Assigning a value to a variable is called binding.
A rule matches if
binding
there is a set of bindings to the variables existing in the training set.
Learning ﬁrst-order rules is similar to learning propositional rules with
an outer loop of adding rules, and an inner loop of adding conditions to
a rule, with prunings at the end of each loop. The diﬀerence is in the
inner loop, where at each step we consider one predicate to add (instead
of a proposition) and check the increase in the performance of the rule
(Mitchell 1997). To calculate the performance of a rule, we consider all
possible bindings of the variables, count the number of positive and neg-
ative bindings in the training set, and use, for example, equation 9.17. In
this ﬁrst-order case, we have predicates instead of propositions, so they
should be previously deﬁned, and the training set is a set of predicates
known to be true.
9.6
Multivariate Trees
In the case of a univariate tree, only one input dimension is used at a
split. In a multivariate tree, at a decision node, all input dimensions can
multivariate tree
be used and thus it is more general. When all inputs are numeric, a binary
linear multivariate node is deﬁned as
fm(x) : wT
mx + wm0 > 0
(9.19)
Because the linear multivariate node takes a weighted sum, discrete
attributes should be represented by 0/1 dummy numeric variables. Equa-
tion 9.19 deﬁnes a hyperplane with arbitrary orientation (see ﬁgure 9.8).
Successive nodes on a path from the root to a leaf further divide these,
and leaf nodes deﬁne polyhedra in the input space. The univariate node
with a numeric feature is a special case when all but one of wmj are 0.
Thus the univariate numeric node of equation 9.1 also deﬁnes a linear
discriminant but one that is orthogonal to axis xj, intersecting it at wm0
and parallel to all other xi. We therefore see that in a univariate node
there are d possible orientations (wm) and Nm −1 possible thresholds
(−wm0), making an exhaustive search possible. In a multivariate node,
there are 2d

Nm
d

possible hyperplanes (Murthy, Kasif, and Salzberg
1994) and an exhaustive search is no longer practical.

9.6
Multivariate Trees
203
 

Figure 9.8
Example of a linear multivariate decision tree. The linear multivari-
ate node can place an arbitrary hyperplane and thus is more general, whereas
the univariate node is restricted to axis-aligned splits.
When we go from a univariate node to a linear multivariate node, the
node becomes more ﬂexible. It is possible to make it even more ﬂexible
by using a nonlinear multivariate node. For example, with a quadratic, we
have
fm(x) : xT Wmx + wT
mx + wm0 > 0
(9.20)
Guo and Gelfand (1992) propose to use a multilayer perceptron (chap-
ter 11) that is a linear sum of nonlinear basis functions, and this is an-
other way of having nonlinear decision nodes. Another possibility is a
sphere node (Devroye, Györﬁ, and Lugosi 1996)
sphere node
fm(x) : ∥x −cm∥≤αm
(9.21)
where cm is the center and αm is the radius.
There are a number of algorithms proposed for learning multivariate
decision trees for classiﬁcation: The earliest is the multivariate version of
the CART algorithm (Breiman et al. 1984), which ﬁne-tunes the weights
CART
wmj one by one to decrease impurity. CART also has a preprocessing
stage to decrease dimensionality through subset selection (chapter 6) and
reduce the complexity of the node. An algorithm with some extensions
to CART is the OC1 algorithm (Murthy, Kasif, and Salzberg 1994). One
OC1

204
9
Decision Trees
possibility (Loh and Vanichsetakul 1988) is to assume that all classes are
Gaussian with a common covariance matrix, thereby having linear dis-
criminants separating each class from the others (chapter 5). In such a
case, with K classes, each node has K branches and each branch carries
the discriminant separating one class from the others. Brodley and Ut-
goﬀ(1995) propose a method where the linear discriminants are trained
to minimize classiﬁcation error (chapter 10).
Guo and Gelfand (1992)
propose a heuristic to group K > 2 classes into two supergroups, and
then binary multivariate trees can be learned. Loh and Shih (1997) use 2-
means clustering (chapter 7) to group data into two. Yıldız and Alpaydın
(2000) use LDA (chapter 6) to ﬁnd the discriminant once the classes are
grouped into two.
Any classiﬁer approximates the real (unknown) discriminant choosing
one hypothesis from its hypothesis class. When we use univariate nodes,
our approximation uses piecewise, axis-aligned hyperplanes. With linear
multivariate nodes, we can use arbitrary hyperplanes and do a better ap-
proximation using fewer nodes. If the underlying discriminant is curved,
nonlinear nodes work better. The branching factor has a similar eﬀect
in that it speciﬁes the number of discriminants that a node deﬁnes. A
binary decision node with two branches deﬁnes one discriminant sepa-
rating the input space into two. An n-way node separates into n. Thus,
there is a dependency among the complexity of a node, the branching
factor, and tree size. With simple nodes and low branching factors, one
may grow large trees, but such trees, for example, with univariate binary
nodes, are more interpretable. Linear multivariate nodes are more dif-
ﬁcult to interpret. More complex nodes also require more data and are
prone to overﬁtting as we get down the tree and have less and less data.
If the nodes are complex and the tree is small, we also lose the main idea
of the tree, which is that of dividing the problem into a set of simple
problems. After all, we can have a very complex classiﬁer in the root that
separates all classes from each other, but then this will not be a tree!
9.7
Notes
Divide-and-conquer is a frequently used heuristic that has been used
since the days of Caesar to break a complex problem, for example, Gaul,
into a group of simpler problems. Trees are frequently used in computer
science to decrease complexity from linear to log time. Decision trees

9.7
Notes
205
were made popular in statistics in Breiman et al. 1984 and in machine
learning in Quinlan 1986 and Quinlan 1993. Multivariate tree induction
methods became popular more recently; a review and comparison on
many datasets are given in Yıldız and Alpaydın 2000. Many researchers
(e.g., Guo and Gelfand 1992), proposed to combine the simplicity of trees
with the accuracy of multilayer perceptrons (chapter 11). Many studies,
however, have concluded that the univariate trees are quite accurate and
interpretable, and the additional complexity brought by linear (or non-
linear) multivariate nodes is hardly justiﬁed. A recent survey is given by
Rokach and Maimon (2005).
The omnivariate decision tree (Yıldız and Alpaydın 2001) is a hybrid
omnivariate
decision tree
tree architecture where the tree may have univariate, linear multivariate,
or nonlinear multivariate nodes. The idea is that during construction, at
each decision node, which corresponds to a diﬀerent subproblem deﬁned
by the subset of the training data reaching that node, a diﬀerent model
may be appropriate and the appropriate one should be found and used.
Using the same type of nodes everywhere corresponds to assuming that
the same inductive bias is good in all parts of the input space. In an omni-
variate tree, at each node, candidate nodes of diﬀerent types are trained
and compared using a statistical test (chapter 19) on a validation set to
determine which one generalizes the best.
The simpler one is chosen
unless a more complex one is shown to have signiﬁcantly higher accu-
racy. Results show that more complex nodes are used early in the tree,
closer to the root, and as we go down the tree, simple univariate nodes
suﬃce. As we get closer to the leaves, we have simpler problems and, at
the same time, we have less data. In such a case, complex nodes overﬁt
and are rejected by the statistical test. The number of nodes increases
exponentially as we go down the tree; therefore, a large majority of the
nodes are univariate and the overall complexity does not increase much.
Decision trees are used more frequently for classiﬁcation than for re-
gression. They are very popular: They learn and respond quickly, and
are accurate in many domains (Murthy 1998). It is even the case that a
decision tree is preferred over more accurate methods, because it is in-
terpretable. When written down as a set of IF-THEN rules, the tree can be
understood and the rules can be validated by human experts who have
knowledge of the application domain.
It is generally recommended that a decision tree be tested and its ac-
curacy be taken as a benchmark before more complicated algorithms are
employed. Analysis of the tree also allows an understanding of the im-

206
9
Decision Trees
portant features, and the univariate tree does its own automatic feature
extraction. Another big advantage of the univariate tree is that it can use
numeric and discrete features together, without needing to convert one
type into the other.
The decision tree is a nonparametric method, similar to the instance-
based methods discussed in chapter 8, but there are a number of diﬀer-
ences:
■Each leaf node corresponds to a “bin,” except that the bins need not
be the same size (as in Parzen windows) or contain an equal number
of training instances (as in k-nearest neighbor).
■The bin divisions are not done based only on similarity in the input
space, but supervised output information through entropy or mean
square error is also used.
■Another advantage of the decision tree is that, thanks to the tree struc-
ture, the leaf (“bin”) is found much faster with smaller number of com-
parisons.
■The decision tree, once it is constructed, does not store all the training
set but only the structure of the tree, the parameters of the decision
nodes, and the output values in leaves; this implies that the space com-
plexity is also much less, as opposed to instance-based nonparametric
methods that store all training examples.
With a decision tree, a class need not have a single description to which
all instances should match. It may have a number of possible descrip-
tions that can even be disjoint in the input space.
The tree is diﬀerent from the statistical models discussed in previous
chapters. The tree codes directly the discriminants separating class in-
stances without caring much for how those instances are distributed in
the regions. The decision tree is discriminant-based, whereas the statisti-
cal methods are likelihood-based in that they explicitly estimate p(x|Ci)
before using Bayes’ rule and calculating the discriminant. Discriminant-
based methods directly estimate the discriminants, bypassing the esti-
mation of class densities. We further discuss such discriminant-based
methods in the chapters ahead.

9.8
Exercises
207
9.8
Exercises
1. Generalize the Gini index (equation 9.5) and the misclassiﬁcation error (equa-
tion 9.6) for K > 2 classes. Generalize misclassiﬁcation error to risk, taking a
loss function into account.
2. For a numeric input, instead of a binary split, one can use a ternary split with
two thresholds and three branches as
xj < wma, wma ≤xj < wmb, xj ≥wmb
Propose a modiﬁcation of the tree induction method to learn the two thresh-
olds, wma, wmb. What are the advantages and the disadvantages of such a
node over a binary node?
3. Propose a tree induction algorithm with backtracking.
4. In generating a univariate tree, a discrete attribute with n possible values
can be represented by n 0/1 dummy variables and then treated as n sepa-
rate numeric attributes. What are the advantages and disadvantages of this
approach?
5. Derive a learning algorithm for sphere trees (equation 9.21). Generalize to
ellipsoid trees.
6. In a regression tree, we discussed that in a leaf node, instead of calculating
the mean, we can do a linear regression ﬁt and make the response at the leaf
dependent on the input. Propose a similar method for classiﬁcation trees.
7. Propose a rule induction algorithm for regression.
8. In regression trees, how can we get rid of discountinuities at the leaf bound-
aries?
9. Let us say that for a classiﬁcation problem, we already have a trained decision
tree. How can we use it in addition to the training set in constructing a k-
nearest neighbor classiﬁer?
10. In a multivariate tree, very probably, at each internal node, we will not be
needing all the input variables.
How can we decrease dimensionality at a
node?
9.9
References
Breiman, L., J. H. Friedman, R. A. Olshen, and C. J. Stone. 1984. Classiﬁcation
and Regression Trees. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth International Group.
Brodley, C. E., and P. E. Utgoﬀ. 1995. “Multivariate Decision Trees.” Machine
Learning 19: 45–77.

208
9
Decision Trees
Cohen, W. 1995. “Fast Eﬀective Rule Induction.” In Twelfth International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, ed. A. Prieditis and S. J. Russell, 115–123. San
Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Devroye, L., L. Györﬁ, and G. Lugosi. 1996. A Probabilistic Theory of Pattern
Recognition. New York: Springer.
Dietterich, T. G. 1997. “Machine Learning Research: Four Current Directions.”
AI Magazine 18: 97–136.
Fürnkranz, J., and G. Widmer. 1994. “Incremental Reduced Error Pruning.” In
Eleventh International Conference on Machine Learning, ed. W. Cohen and H.
Hirsh, 70–77. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Guo, H., and S. B. Gelfand. 1992. “Classiﬁcation Trees with Neural Network
Feature Extraction.” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 3: 923–933.
Loh, W.-Y., and Y. S. Shih.
1997. “Split Selection Methods for Classiﬁcation
Trees.” Statistica Sinica 7: 815–840.
Loh, W.-Y., and N. Vanichsetakul. 1988. “Tree-Structured Classiﬁcation via Gen-
eralized Discriminant Analysis.” Journal of the American Statistical Associa-
tion 83: 715–725.
Mitchell, T. 1997. Machine Learning. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Murthy, S. K. 1998. “Automatic Construction of Decision Trees from Data: A
Multi-Disciplinary Survey.” Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 4: 345–
389.
Murthy, S. K., S. Kasif, and S. Salzberg. 1994. “A System for Induction of Oblique
Decision Trees.” Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 2: 1–32.
Quinlan, J. R. 1986. “Induction of Decision Trees.” Machine Learning 1: 81–106.
Quinlan, J. R. 1990. “Learning Logical Deﬁnitions from Relations.”
Machine
Learning 5: 239–266.
Quinlan, J. R. 1993.
C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning.
San Mateo, CA:
Morgan Kaufmann.
Quinlan, J. R. 1995. “MDL and Categorical Theories (continued).” In Twelfth In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, ed. A. Prieditis and S. J. Russell,
467–470. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Rokach, L., and O. Maimon.
2005.
“Top-Down Induction of Decision Trees
Classiﬁers—A Survey.” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics–
Part C 35: 476–487.
Yıldız, O. T., and E. Alpaydın. 2000. “Linear Discriminant Trees.” In Seventeenth
International Conference on Machine Learning, ed.
P. Langley, 1175–1182.
San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Yıldız, O. T., and E. Alpaydın. 2001. “Omnivariate Decision Trees.” IEEE Trans-
actions on Neural Networks 12: 1539–1546.
